We're going to talk now about the shape of
the Jacobian matrix. A robot manipulator has
in general got N joints, N could be a small
number, the robot might have only two
joints. The robots might have 100 joints.
I want to understand what's the effect of
the number of joints on the shape of the robot
manipulator Jacobian matrix, because the Jacobian
has one column per joint. So, an N joint robot
has a manipulator Jacobian matrix with N columns.
The Jacobian has one row for each element
of the spatial velocity vector. So, for motion
in three dimensions, the spatial velocity
vector has got 6 elements – 3 for translational
velocity and 3 for angular velocity. And,
that means the Jacobian matrix always has
six rows. So, the robot manipulator Jacobian
matrix is a 6 x N matrix.
This robot only has 4 joints and we call it
an under actuated robot. And, that means that
its task space doesn't cover all of the set
SE3. Although the end effector can achieve
all positions within the limits of its works
space, it's not able to achieve all possible orientations.
So, for example, when the robot in a configuration
like this, it can adjust the orientation of
the gripper like that. But, it's impossible
for it to adjust the orientation of the gripper
in that direction or in that direction.
Let's consider the case of a robot with only
4 joints. This is often referred to as an
under-actuated robotic system. In this case,
the robot Jacobian has got 6 rows and 4 columns.
The Jacobian is not square, and therefore,
we cannot invert it. But that's not necessarily
a problem. A robot like this is unable to
rotate the tool about the x or y axis. It's
just the way it's constructed. It cannot rotate
the tool in that way. So, we can strike out
these elements of the robot’s spatial velocity.
Since we can't control velocity around these
axes, let's just remove them.
If I do that, then I should also remove the
corresponding rows in the Jacobian matrix.
And, the result now is a 4 x 4 system. And
now, the Jacobian matrix is invertible. Given
a desired spatial velocity, it's a smaller
spatial velocity vector now. We can compute
the robot joint angle velocities. We need
to obtain that spatial velocity.
Here's a robot that has perhaps 100 joints.
In this case, the manipulator Jacobian is
a 6 x 100 matrix. It's not square and we
cannot invert it. We can compute something
called the pseudo-inverse and that's often
denoted by the symbol plus.
The pseudo-inverse is computed in this way.
This looks quite straight forward until you
remind yourself that the term inside here
is in fact a 100 x 100 matrix and we need to
invert that. And computationally, that's not
a simple thing to do. However, if we use this
pseudo-inverse, we can write an expression
that relates the desired spatial velocity
of the robots end effector to the required
velocity of each of its 100 joints.
But we can do an extra thing as well in the case
of a robot like this – a robot with more
than 6 joints. We can add this term here and
we refer to this as the null-space motion.
It's pre-multiplied by this matrix expression
here, which effectively filters it, so that
this motion does not affect the pose of the
robot end effector. We can use this motion,
which doesn't affect the end effector pose
to do things like change the shape of the
arm. We can also use it to do things like
move a robot joint away from its limit towards
the middle part of its working range.
So, we use this extra joint velocity motion
to change the shape of the arm, move joints
away from their limits. At the same time not
affecting the end effector pose. It's a pretty
neat trick. This matrix N is referred to as
the null space of the Jacobian matrix. It
is the set of vectors that pre-multiplied
by the manipulator Jacobian matrix, give a
result of zero. In this particular case, if
the robot had 100 joints, then the null space
would be of dimension 94. That's 100 minus
6. So, N would be a 6 x 94 element matrix.
I'm going to import the model of a redundant
robot that moves in 3D and that's the model
hyper 3D. And, I'm going to ask for a robot
with 20 joints. To illustrate, for example,
I need to choose a set of joint angles. I
need to choose 20 numbers. I know that if
they're all equal to zero, the robot will
be at a singularity.
So, what I'm going to do is to choose 20 random
numbers. I'm going to use the MATLAB built-in
function rand. So, this is my joint angle
vector – 20 random numbers in the range
0 to 1. And, I can plot this particular joint
angle configuration for a robot and this is
what it looks like. If I can just have a bit
of a look around and we can see that it's
pointing slightly upwards and it's got a few
bends and twists in it.
Now that I have the set of joint angles and
I have a robot model, I can compute a Jacobian
matrix. And, we've seen how to do that for
many other types of robots. I used the Jacobian
method and I pass in the set of joint angles.
And, this is the Jacobian matrix. We can see
that it's got 6 rows and it's got 20 columns
because there are 20 joints.
If I tried to invert this matrix, I'm going
to get an error because the matrix is not
square. MATLAB is telling me I can't do that
but I can compute the pseudo-inverse. And,
that's computed using the MATLAB built-in
function pinv, and pass in the Jacobian matrix.
And, this is the result of the pseudo-inverse.
And, we can see that we have here in the workspace
now a 20 x 6 matrix, the pseudo-inverse of
the Jacobian matrix.
Now, we talked about the null space motion.
And, in order to compute the null space motion,
we need to compute the null space of the Jacobian
matrix itself and MATLAB has the function to do that.
It's the function null and I pass in the Jacobian
matrix and here is the null space matrix.
The null space matrix has 20 rows and only
14 columns. 14 comes from 20, which is the
number of columns in the original Jacobian
minus 6. And 6 is the rank of that original
Jacobian. That's the number of unique columns
in the Jacobian matrix. So, there were 6 unique
columns and there were 14 columns that exist
in the null space of that Jacobian. 14 plus
6 equals 20, the original number of columns.
Let's summarize some of the different shapes
that a robot Jacobian matrix can have. For
the case of a robot with 6 joints, we say
that the robot is fully actuated. The Jacobian
will be a square 6 x 6 matrix. And a robot
with 6 joints is able to fully access all
poses within SE3.
That means, any position and any arbitrary
orientation. For the case of a robot with
less than 6 joints, which we refer to as an
under-actuated robot, the Jacobian will be a 6 x N matrix. It will have more rows than it has columns.
This means that the robot cannot access all
possible poses within a SE3. And, in order
to use the Jacobian for control purposes,
we need to square it up and we do that by
removing some spatial degrees of freedom.
We eliminate some rows in the Jacobian matrix
so that it becomes a 5 x 5 or 4 x 4 Jacobian
matrix which is then invertible. In the case
of a robot with more than 6 joints, which
we refer to as an over actuated robot, the
Jacobian matrix has more columns than it has
rows. It's a 6 x N matrix.
In order to use the Jacobian matrix for control
purposes, we take its pseudo-inverse. The
great advantage of a robot like this is that
we can think about having spare joints and
we can use some of these spare joints to do
what we call null space motion. And, while
we hold the ineffective pose constant, we
can adjust all of the joints to change the
shape of the arm or move the joints away from
motion limits.